Test DAGs guide update (#1814)
astronomer/docs: learn/testing-airflow.md

  <meta name="og:description" content="Learn about testing Airflow DAGs and gain insight into various types of tests — validation testing, unit testing, and data and pipeline integrity testing." />
</head>

Effectively testing DAGs requires an understanding of their structure and their relationship to other code and data in your environment. In this guide, you'll learn about various types of DAG validation testing, unit testing, and where to find further information on data quality checks.

## Assumed knowledge

To get the most out of this guide, you should have an understanding of:

- Python testing basics. See [Getting Started with Testing in Python](https://realpython.com/python-testing/).
- CI/CD for Python scripts. See [Continuous Integration with Python: An Introduction](https://realpython.com/python-continuous-integration/).
- Basic Airflow and [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/install-cli) concepts. See [Get started with Airflow tutorial](get-started-with-airflow.md).

> ## Python test runners

Reviewer: I would keep this where it is. `pytest` isn't a form of validation testing, it's a Python testing framework. It could be used for validation testing, but could also be used for unit testing and mocking. We had this upfront in the original guide just to highlight that while we use `pytest` in this guide, there are other test runners that would work with Airflow and which you choose is a matter of preference.

> ## Python test runners

Reviewer: sorry @TJaniF if you already moved this 😅

> ## Python test runners

Author: Haha, not much work to move it back 😅

> ## Python test runners

Author: This would work for me. :)

Maybe as the second prereq bulletpoint? Something like:

```
To get the most out of this guide, you should have an understanding of:

- Python testing basics. See [Getting Started with Testing in Python](https://realpython.com/python-testing/).
- At least one Python test runner. This guide mostly uses [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/index.html), but you can use others including [`nose2`](https://docs.nose2.io/en/latest/getting_started.html) and [`unittest`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html).
```

I changed it to 'mostly uses' because the Unittest section that I did not edit uses `unittest` instead of `pytest`. 

Would this work for you too @kentdanas ? :)

> ## Python test runners

Reviewer: Yep, works for me!

- Including automatic DAG validation testing in a CI/CD pipeline.
- Enabling power users to test DAGs from the CLI.

DAG validation tests apply to all DAGs in your Airflow environment, so you only need to create one test suite.

### Astro dev pytest

Airflow allows you to define testing suites using any Python test runner. You can run these suites by executing `python my_test_suite.py` from the command line within your Airflow environment (locally if you are running a standalone Airflow instance, within the Docker container if you are running Airflow in Docker).

When using the [Astro CLI]((https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/install-cli)) every new Astro project will be initialized with a `test/dags` folder in your Astro project directory. This folder contains the `test_dag_integrity.py` script containing several examples of using `pytest` with Airflow.

You can run 

```sh
astro dev pytest
```

to run all pytest test suites in the `test` directory of your current Airflow project (see also the [Astro CLI reference](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/astro-dev-pytest)). Airflow does not need to be running for using this command.

#### Prevent Import Errors

> The most commonly run DAG validation test is to check for import errors using the `.import_errors` attribute of the initialized `DagBag` model. The code below shows a complete testing suite collecting DAG import errors. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most common DAG validation test is to check for import errors using the `.import_errors` attribute of the initialized `DagBag` model. The code below shows a complete testing suite collecting DAG import errors. 
```

    """
    test if a DAG is tagged and if those TAGs are in the approved list
    """
    assert dag.tags, f"{dag_id} in {fileloc} has no tags"
    if APPROVED_TAGS:
        assert not set(dag.tags) - APPROVED_TAGS
```

You can also set requirements at the task level by accessing the `tasks` attribute within the `dag` model, which contains a list of all task objects of a DAG. The test below checks that all DAGs contain at least one task and all tasks use `trigger_rule="all_success"`.

```python
@pytest.mark.parametrize(
    "dag_id,dag,fileloc", get_dags(), ids=[x[2] for x in get_dags()]
)
def test_dag_tags(dag_id, dag, fileloc):
    """
    test if all DAGs contain a task and all tasks use the trigger_rule all_success
    """
    assert dag.tasks, f"{dag_id} in {fileloc} has no tasks"
    for task in dag.tasks:
        t_rule = task.trigger_rule
        assert t_rule == "all_success", f"{task} in {dag_id} has the trigger rule {t_rule}"
```

:::tip

You can view the attributes and methods available for the `dag` model in the [Airflow documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/models/dag/index.html).

:::

### dag.test()

> Airflow 2.5.0 introduced the possibility to set up the `dag.test()` command directly in the DAG file to run through all tasks in a DAG within a single serialized Python process, allowing for faster fails in case of an issue with a task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Airflow 2.5.0 introduced the `dag.test()` command, which runs directly in the DAG file and allows you to run all tasks in a DAG within a single serialized Python process. This allows for faster iteration when developing DAGs.
```

> You can set up `dag.test()` by adding two lines at the end of the DAG file. If you are using a traditional DAG context call `.test()` on the object the context is assigned to, if you are using the `@dag` decorator call the method on a call of the decorated function. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can set up `dag.test()` by adding two lines at the end of the DAG file. If you are using a traditional DAG context, call `.test()` on the object the context is assigned to. If you are using the `@dag` decorator, call the method on a call of the decorated function. 
```

```python
from airflow import DAG
from pendulum import datetime
from airflow.operators.empty import EmptyOperator

with DAG(
    dag_id="simple_classic_dag",
    start_date=datetime(2023, 1, 1),
    schedule="@daily",
    catchup=False,
) as dag:  # assigning the context to an object is mandatory for using dag.test()

    t1 = EmptyOperator(task_id="t1")

# Added statement at the end of the DAG
if __name__ == "__main__":
    dag.test()
```

```python
from airflow.decorators import dag
from pendulum import datetime
from airflow.operators.empty import EmptyOperator

@dag(
    start_date=datetime(2023, 1, 1),
    schedule="@daily",
    catchup=False,
)
def my_dag():

    t1 = EmptyOperator(task_id="t1")

my_dag()

# Added statement at the end of the DAG
if __name__ == "__main__":
    my_dag().test()
```

> You can run the `.test()` method on all tasks in an individual DAG by executing `python <path to dag file>.py` from the command line within your Airflow environment (locally if you are running a standalone Airflow instance, within the Docker container if you are running Airflow in Docker).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can run the `.test()` method on all tasks in an individual DAG by executing `python <path to dag file>.py` from the command line within your Airflow environment, locally if you are running a standalone Airflow instance, or within the Docker container if you are running Airflow in Docker.
```

> In order to get an interactive debugging experience use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To take advantage of `pdb` ([The Python Debugger](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pdb.html)), an interactive source code debugger, and get an interactive debugging experience, you can run:
```

```sh
python -m pdb <path to dag file>.py
```

> `pdb` is [The Python Debugger](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pdb.html), an interactive source code debugger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This functionality replaces the deprecated DebugExecutor. Learn more in the [Airflow documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/core-concepts/executor/debug.html).

### Airflow CLI 

The Airflow CLI offers two commands related to local testing:

> - [airflow dags test](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/cli-and-env-variables-ref.html#test): Executes one single DagRun for a given DAG and execution date and writes the result to the metadata database. This command is useful to create manual Dagruns from the command line to test full DAGs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`airflow dags test`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/cli-and-env-variables-ref.html#test): Executes one single DagRun for a given DAG and execution date and writes the result to the metadata database. This command is useful for testing full DAGs by creating manual Dagruns from the command line.
```

> - [airflow tasks test](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/cli-and-env-variables-ref.html#test_repeat1): Tests one specific task instance without checking for dependencies or recording the outcome in the metadata database. This command is useful to troubleshoot issues with specific tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`airflow tasks test`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/cli-and-env-variables-ref.html#test_repeat1): Tests one specific task instance without checking for dependencies or recording the outcome in the metadata database. This command is useful for troubleshooting issues with specific tasks.
```

> If you are using the Astro CLI you can run all Airflow CLI commands without entering the Docker container by using [`astro dev run`](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/astro-dev-run). For example to run `airflow dags test` on the DAG `my_dag` for the execution date of `2023-01-29` run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the Astro CLI, you can run all Airflow CLI commands without entering the Docker container by using [`astro dev run`](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/astro-dev-run). For example, to run `airflow dags test` on the DAG `my_dag` for the execution date of `2023-01-29` run:
```

```sh
astro dev run dags test my_dag '2023-01-29'
```

> ### CI/CD with the Astro CLI

Reviewer: Maybe we should link to our CICD docs from this section for any Astro users?

### Common DAG validation tests

This section covers the most common types of DAG validation tests with full code examples.

#### Prevent Import Errors

The most common DAG validation test is to check for import errors using the `.import_errors` attribute of the initialized `DagBag` model. The code below shows a complete testing suite collecting DAG import errors. 

```python
import os
import pytest
from airflow.models import DagBag

def get_import_errors():
    """
    Generate a tuple for import errors in the dag bag
    """

    dag_bag = DagBag(include_examples=False)

    def strip_path_prefix(path):
        return os.path.relpath(path, os.environ.get("AIRFLOW_HOME"))

    # we prepend "(None,None)" to ensure that a test object is always created even if its a no op.
    return [(None, None)] + [
        (strip_path_prefix(k), v.strip()) for k, v in dag_bag.import_errors.items()
    ]

@pytest.mark.parametrize(
    "rel_path,rv", get_import_errors(), ids=[x[0] for x in get_import_errors()]
)
def test_file_imports(rel_path, rv):
    """Test for import errors on a file"""
    if rel_path and rv:
        raise Exception(f"{rel_path} failed to import with message \n {rv}")
```

> #### Set custom DAG requirements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Check for custom code requirements
```

Airflow allows a great deal of DAG customization. It is common for data engineering teams to define best practices and custom rules around how their DAGs should be written and create DAG validation tests to ensure those standards are met.

> The code snippet below shows a test which checks that all DAGs have their `tags` parameter set to one or more of the `APPROVED_TAGS`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The code snippet below includes a test which checks that all DAGs have their `tags` parameter set to one or more of the `APPROVED_TAGS`.
```

```python
import os
import pytest
from airflow.models import DagBag

def get_dags():
    """
    Generate a tuple of dag_id, <DAG objects> in the DagBag
    """

    dag_bag = DagBag(include_examples=False)

    def strip_path_prefix(path):
        return os.path.relpath(path, os.environ.get("AIRFLOW_HOME"))

    return [(k, v, strip_path_prefix(v.fileloc)) for k, v in dag_bag.dags.items()]

APPROVED_TAGS = {'customer_success', 'op_analytics', 'product'}

@pytest.mark.parametrize(
    "dag_id,dag,fileloc", get_dags(), ids=[x[2] for x in get_dags()]
)
def test_dag_tags(dag_id, dag, fileloc):
    """
    test if a DAG is tagged and if those TAGs are in the approved list
    """
    assert dag.tags, f"{dag_id} in {fileloc} has no tags"
    if APPROVED_TAGS:
        assert not set(dag.tags) - APPROVED_TAGS
```

:::tip

You can view the attributes and methods available for the `dag` model in the [Airflow documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/models/dag/index.html).

:::

> #### Set custom task requirements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

You can also set requirements at the task level by accessing the `tasks` attribute within the `dag` model, which contains a list of all task objects of a DAG. The test below checks that all DAGs contain at least one task and all tasks use `trigger_rule="all_success"`.

```python
@pytest.mark.parametrize(
    "dag_id,dag,fileloc", get_dags(), ids=[x[2] for x in get_dags()]
)
def test_dag_tags(dag_id, dag, fileloc):
    """
    test if all DAGs contain a task and all tasks use the trigger_rule all_success
    """
    assert dag.tasks, f"{dag_id} in {fileloc} has no tasks"
    for task in dag.tasks:
        t_rule = task.trigger_rule
        assert t_rule == "all_success", f"{task} in {dag_id} has the trigger rule {t_rule}"
```

### Implementing DAG validation tests

> Airflow offers different ways to run DAG validation tests. This section gives an overview over the most common implementation methods. If you are new to testing Airflow DAGs we recommend to use `astro dev pytest` in combination with the common DAG validation tests from the previous section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Airflow offers different ways to run DAG validation tests. This section gives an overview over the most common implementation methods.
```
This sentence feels a little bit out of place, I think it makes more sense to include in the next section.

> #### Astro dev pytest

Reviewer: Thinking about Dylan's comment in Slack....maybe we should rename this section to The Astro CLI and also mention `astro dev parse` briefly and then link out to the Astro docs https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/test-and-troubleshoot-locally#run-tests-with-the-astro-cli.

Author: Thank you! I somehow was unaware of `astro dev parse` before seeing Dylan's comment. 😳 Rewrote that section to include both commands and link out. I also a added a link to that Astro Doc in the debugging guide.

@jwitz I think this is ready for your review :)

> Airflow allows you to define testing suites using any Python test runner. You can run these suites by executing `python my_test_suite.py` from the command line within your Airflow environment (locally if you are running a standalone Airflow instance, within the Docker container if you are running Airflow in Docker).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
If you go with Kenten's suggestion above, I would move this to the Airflow CLI section

> When using the [Astro CLI]((https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/install-cli)) every new Astro project will be initialized with a `test/dags` folder in your Astro project directory. This folder contains the `test_dag_integrity.py` script containing several examples of using `pytest` with Airflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you create a new project with the [Astro CLI]((https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/install-cli)), the project includes a `test/dags` folder. This folder contains a default `test_dag_integrity.py` script containing several example pytests. This is also where you can add your own custom pytests.
```

> You can run `astro dev pytest` to run all pytest test suites in the `test` directory of your current Airflow project (see also the [Astro CLI reference](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/astro-dev-pytest)). Airflow does not need to be running to use this command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Run [`astro dev pytest`](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/astro-dev-pytest) to run all pytests in the `test` directory. You don't need to start Airflow to use this command, so you can quickly run it as part of a CI/CD pipeline or any other process with limited resources.
```

#### dag.test()

Airflow 2.5.0 introduced the `dag.test()` method, which runs directly in the DAG file and allows you to run all tasks in a DAG within a single serialized Python process. This allows for faster iteration when developing DAGs.

You can set up `dag.test()` by adding two lines at the end of the DAG file. If you are using a traditional DAG context, call `.test()` on the object the context is assigned to. If you are using the `@dag` decorator, call the method on a call of the decorated function. 

> ```python

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```python{14-15}
```

Reviewer 2: This will highlight the code in the code block, so we can skip out on the comment in the DAG!

from airflow import DAG
from pendulum import datetime
from airflow.operators.empty import EmptyOperator

with DAG(
    dag_id="simple_classic_dag",
    start_date=datetime(2023, 1, 1),
    schedule="@daily",
    catchup=False,
) as dag:  # assigning the context to an object is mandatory for using dag.test()

    t1 = EmptyOperator(task_id="t1")

> # Added statement at the end of the DAG

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

if __name__ == "__main__":
    dag.test()
```

> ```python

Reviewer 2: Can we use tabs here?

from airflow.decorators import dag
from pendulum import datetime
from airflow.operators.empty import EmptyOperator

@dag(
    start_date=datetime(2023, 1, 1),
    schedule="@daily",
    catchup=False,
)
def my_dag():

    t1 = EmptyOperator(task_id="t1")

my_dag()

> # Added statement at the end of the DAG

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

    """
    test if a DAG is tagged and if those TAGs are in the approved list
    """
    assert dag.tags, f"{dag_id} in {fileloc} has no tags"
    if APPROVED_TAGS:
        assert not set(dag.tags) - APPROVED_TAGS
```

:::tip

You can view the attributes and methods available for the `dag` model in the [Airflow documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/models/dag/index.html).

:::

#### Set custom task requirements

You can also set requirements at the task level by accessing the `tasks` attribute within the `dag` model, which contains a list of all task objects of a DAG. The test below checks that all DAGs contain at least one task and all tasks use `trigger_rule="all_success"`.

```python
@pytest.mark.parametrize(
    "dag_id,dag,fileloc", get_dags(), ids=[x[2] for x in get_dags()]
)
def test_dag_tags(dag_id, dag, fileloc):
    """
    test if all DAGs contain a task and all tasks use the trigger_rule all_success
    """
    assert dag.tasks, f"{dag_id} in {fileloc} has no tasks"
    for task in dag.tasks:
        t_rule = task.trigger_rule
        assert t_rule == "all_success", f"{task} in {dag_id} has the trigger rule {t_rule}"
```

> ### Implementing DAG validation tests

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Implementing DAG validation tests
```

Airflow offers different ways to run DAG validation tests using any Python test runner. This section gives an overview of the most common implementation methods. 
If you are new to testing Airflow DAGs we recommend to get started using the commands provided by the Astro CLI.

> #### The Astro CLI

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### The Astro CLI
```

The Astro CLI includes two commands to run DAG validation tests. Airflow does not need to be running to use these commands.

- [`astro dev parse`](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/astro-dev-parse): will quickly parse your DAGs to find any Python syntax or DAG import errors.
- [`astro dev pytest`](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/astro-dev-pytest): will run all pytest test suites in the `test` directory of your current Airflow project.

Every new Astro project will be initialized with a `test/dags` folder in your Astro project directory. This folder contains the `test_dag_integrity.py` script defining several examples of using `pytest` with Airflow, see also the Astro documentation's [Test and troubleshoot locally](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/test-and-troubleshoot-locally#test-dags-with-the-astro-cli).

> #### dag.test()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### dag.test()
```

You can set up `dag.test()` by adding two lines at the end of the DAG file. If you are using a traditional DAG context, call `.test()` on the object the context is assigned to. If you are using the `@dag` decorator, call the method on a call of the decorated function. 

```python
from airflow import DAG
from pendulum import datetime
from airflow.operators.empty import EmptyOperator

with DAG(
    dag_id="simple_classic_dag",
    start_date=datetime(2023, 1, 1),
    schedule="@daily",
    catchup=False,
) as dag:  # assigning the context to an object is mandatory for using dag.test()

    t1 = EmptyOperator(task_id="t1")

# Added statement at the end of the DAG
if __name__ == "__main__":
    dag.test()
```

```python
from airflow.decorators import dag
from pendulum import datetime
from airflow.operators.empty import EmptyOperator

@dag(
    start_date=datetime(2023, 1, 1),
    schedule="@daily",
    catchup=False,
)
def my_dag():

    t1 = EmptyOperator(task_id="t1")

my_dag()

# Added statement at the end of the DAG
if __name__ == "__main__":
    my_dag().test()
```

> You can run the `.test()` method on all tasks in an individual DAG by executing `python <path to dag file>.py` from the command line within your Airflow environment, locally if you are running a standalone Airflow instance, or within the Docker container if you are running Airflow in Docker.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can run the `.test()` method on all tasks in an individual DAG by executing `python <path-to-dag-file>` from the command line within your Airflow environment. You would execute this locally if you are running a standalone Airflow instance, or within the Docker container if you are running Airflow in Docker.
```
The Docker container for which component? What's the fastest way to do this with the Astro CLI?

> To take advantage of `pdb` ([The Python Debugger](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pdb.html)), an interactive source code debugger, and get an interactive debugging experience, you can run:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use `pdb` ([The Python Debugger](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pdb.html)), an interactive source code debugger, by running:
```

```sh
python -m pdb <path to dag file>.py
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

This functionality replaces the deprecated DebugExecutor. Learn more in the [Airflow documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/core-concepts/executor/debug.html).

> #### Airflow CLI 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Airflow CLI 
```

The Airflow CLI offers two commands related to local testing:

> - [`airflow dags test`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/cli-and-env-variables-ref.html#test): Executes one single DagRun for a given DAG and execution date and writes the result to the metadata database. This command is useful for testing full DAGs by creating manual Dagruns from the command line.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`airflow dags test`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/cli-and-env-variables-ref.html#test): Given a DAG ID and execution date, this command writes the results of a single DAG run to the metadata database. This command is useful for testing full DAGs by creating manual DAG runs from the command line.
```

> - [`airflow tasks test`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/cli-and-env-variables-ref.html#test_repeat1): Tests one specific task instance without checking for dependencies or recording the outcome in the metadata database. This command is useful for troubleshooting issues with specific tasks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`airflow tasks test`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/cli-and-env-variables-ref.html#test_repeat1): This command tests one specific task instance without checking for dependencies or recording the outcome in the metadata database.
```

> With the Astro CLI, you can run all Airflow CLI commands without entering the Docker container by using [`astro dev run`](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/astro-dev-run). For example, to run `airflow dags test` on the DAG `my_dag` for the execution date of `2023-01-29` run:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the Astro CLI, you can run all Airflow CLI commands using [`astro dev run`](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/astro-dev-run). For example, to run `airflow dags test` on the DAG `my_dag` for the execution date of `2023-01-29` run:
```

Reviewer 2: The command still runs in the Docker container tho right?

```sh
astro dev run dags test my_dag '2023-01-29'
```

> ### CI/CD with the Astro CLI

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Test DAGs in a CI/CD pipeline
```

> You can use any CI/CD tool on Airflow code. A common use case is to run the `astro dev pytest` for all pytests in the `tests` directory every time a push or PR to a specific branch in your source control is made. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use any CI/CD tool on Airflow code. A common use case is to run the `astro dev pytest` for all pytests in the `tests` directory every time someone pushes code to a specific branch in your repository.
```

> Below shows an example of a GitHub Action workflow which will install the Astro CLI and use it to run `astro dev pytest` on every push to the `main` branch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following is an example GitHub Action workflow which installs the Astro CLI and runs `astro dev pytest` on every push to the `main` branch.
```

```yaml
name: Airflow CI - Run pytests

on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main
      
jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
    - name: checkout repo
      uses: actions/checkout@v3
    - name: Auto-pytest
      run: |
        curl -sSL install.astronomer.io | sudo bash -s
        astro dev pytest
```

:::info

> If you are an Astronomer customer you can find further information on how to set up CI/CD with your Astro deployment in [our docs](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/ci-cd).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are an Astro customer, you can find further information on how to set up CI/CD to your Astro deployment in [CI/CD](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/ci-cd).
```

</head>

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

Effectively testing DAGs requires an understanding of their structure and their relationship to other code and data in your environment. In this guide, you'll learn about various types of DAG validation testing, unit testing, and where to find further information on data quality checks.

## Assumed knowledge

To get the most out of this guide, you should have an understanding of:

- Python testing basics. See [Getting Started with Testing in Python](https://realpython.com/python-testing/).
- CI/CD for Python scripts. See [Continuous Integration with Python: An Introduction](https://realpython.com/python-continuous-integration/).
- Basic Airflow and [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/install-cli) concepts. See [Get started with Airflow tutorial](get-started-with-airflow.md).

## Python test runners

There are multiple test runners available for Python, including:

- [`unittest`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html)
- [`pytest`](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/index.html)
- [`nose2`](https://docs.nose2.io/en/latest/getting_started.html)

> All types of test runners can be used with Airflow. In this guide we will use `pytest`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All types of test runners can be used with Airflow. The examples in this guide use `pytest`.
```

## DAG validation testing

DAG validation tests ensure that your DAGs fulfill a list of criteria. Using validation tests can help you:

- Develop DAGs without access to a local Airflow environment.
- Ensure that custom DAG requirements are systematically checked and fulfilled.
- Test DAGs automatically in a CI/CD pipeline.
- Enable power users to test DAGs from the CLI.

> We recommend at a minimum including a DAG validation test to check for [import errors](#prevent-import-errors). Additional tests can check things like custom logic, ensuring that `catchup` is set to False for every DAG in your Airflow instance, or making sure only `tags` from a defined list are used in the DAGs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At a minimum, you should run DAG validation tests to check for [import errors](#prevent-import-errors). Additional tests can check things like custom logic, ensuring that `catchup` is set to False for every DAG in your Airflow instance, or making sure only `tags` from a defined list are used in the DAGs.
```

```python
import os
import pytest
from airflow.models import DagBag

def get_import_errors():
    """
    Generate a tuple for import errors in the dag bag
    """

    dag_bag = DagBag(include_examples=False)

    def strip_path_prefix(path):
        return os.path.relpath(path, os.environ.get("AIRFLOW_HOME"))

    # prepend "(None,None)" to ensure that a test object is always created even if it's a no op.
    return [(None, None)] + [
        (strip_path_prefix(k), v.strip()) for k, v in dag_bag.import_errors.items()
    ]

@pytest.mark.parametrize(
    "rel_path,rv", get_import_errors(), ids=[x[0] for x in get_import_errors()]
)
def test_file_imports(rel_path, rv):
    """Test for import errors on a file"""
    if rel_path and rv:
        raise Exception(f"{rel_path} failed to import with message \n {rv}")
```

#### Check for custom code requirements

> Airflow allows a great deal of DAG customization. It is common for data engineering teams to define best practices and custom rules around how their DAGs should be written and create DAG validation tests to ensure those standards are met.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Airflow DAGs support many types of custom plugins and code. It is common for data engineering teams to define best practices and custom rules around how their DAGs should be written and create DAG validation tests to ensure those standards are met.
```

    """
    test if a DAG is tagged and if those TAGs are in the approved list
    """
    assert dag.tags, f"{dag_id} in {fileloc} has no tags"
    if APPROVED_TAGS:
        assert not set(dag.tags) - APPROVED_TAGS
```

:::tip

You can view the attributes and methods available for the `dag` model in the [Airflow documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/models/dag/index.html).

:::

You can also set requirements at the task level by accessing the `tasks` attribute within the `dag` model, which contains a list of all task objects of a DAG. The test below checks that all DAGs contain at least one task and all tasks use `trigger_rule="all_success"`.

```python
@pytest.mark.parametrize(
    "dag_id,dag,fileloc", get_dags(), ids=[x[2] for x in get_dags()]
)
def test_dag_tags(dag_id, dag, fileloc):
    """
    test if all DAGs contain a task and all tasks use the trigger_rule all_success
    """
    assert dag.tasks, f"{dag_id} in {fileloc} has no tasks"
    for task in dag.tasks:
        t_rule = task.trigger_rule
        assert t_rule == "all_success", f"{task} in {dag_id} has the trigger rule {t_rule}"
```

## Implement DAG validation tests

> Airflow offers different ways to run DAG validation tests using any Python test runner. This section gives an overview of the most common implementation methods. 
> If you are new to testing Airflow DAGs we recommend to get started using the commands provided by the Astro CLI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Airflow offers different ways to run DAG validation tests using any Python test runner. This section gives an overview of the most common implementation methods. If you are new to testing Airflow DAGs, you can quickly get started by using Astro CLI commands.
```

### The Astro CLI

The Astro CLI includes two commands to run DAG validation tests. Airflow does not need to be running to use these commands.

- [`astro dev parse`](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/astro-dev-parse): will quickly parse your DAGs to find any Python syntax or DAG import errors.
- [`astro dev pytest`](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/astro-dev-pytest): will run all pytest test suites in the `test` directory of your current Airflow project.

> Every new Astro project will be initialized with a `test/dags` folder in your Astro project directory. This folder contains the `test_dag_integrity.py` script defining several examples of using `pytest` with Airflow, see also the Astro documentation's [Test and troubleshoot locally](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/test-and-troubleshoot-locally#test-dags-with-the-astro-cli).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Every new Astro project will be initialized with a `test/dags` folder in your Astro project directory. This folder contains the `test_dag_integrity.py` script defining several examples of using `pytest` with Airflow. For more information on the Astro CLI's testing capabilities, see [Test and troubleshoot locally](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/test-and-troubleshoot-locally#test-dags-with-the-astro-cli).
```

### Airflow CLI 

The Airflow CLI offers two commands related to local testing:

- [`airflow dags test`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/cli-and-env-variables-ref.html#test): Given a DAG ID and execution date, this command writes the results of a single DAG run to the metadata database. This command is useful for testing full DAGs by creating manual DAG runs from the command line.
- [`airflow tasks test`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/cli-and-env-variables-ref.html#test_repeat1): This command tests one specific task instance without checking for dependencies or recording the outcome in the metadata database.

With the Astro CLI, you can run all Airflow CLI commands using [`astro dev run`](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/astro-dev-run). For example, to run `airflow dags test` on the DAG `my_dag` for the execution date of `2023-01-29` run:

```sh
astro dev run dags test my_dag '2023-01-29'
```

### Test DAGs in a CI/CD pipeline

> You can use any CI/CD tool on Airflow code. A common use case is to run the `astro dev pytest` for all pytests in the `tests` directory every time someone pushes code to a specific branch in your repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use CI/CD tools to test and deploy your Airflow code. A common use case is to run the `astro dev pytest` for all pytests in the `tests` directory every time someone pushes code to a specific branch in your repository.
```

The following is an example GitHub Action workflow which installs the Astro CLI and runs `astro dev pytest` on every push to the `main` branch.

```yaml
name: Airflow CI - Run pytests

on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main
      
jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
    - name: checkout repo
      uses: actions/checkout@v3
    - name: Auto-pytest
      run: |
        curl -sSL install.astronomer.io | sudo bash -s
        astro dev pytest
```

> :::info
> 
> If you are an Astro customer, you can find further information on how to set up CI/CD to your Astro deployment in [CI/CD](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/ci-cd).
> 
> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are an Astro customer, you can find further information on how to set up CI/CD to your Astro deployment in [CI/CD](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/ci-cd).
```

> ## Interactive debugging with dag.test()

Author: Pdb works with breakpoints in the code where the execution of the dag will hold and then you can do things like print out the current value for specific variables in this moment or fetch the source code of a function and other things I haven't used yet :)

<Tabs
    defaultValue="traditional"
    groupId= "dag-test-examples"
    values={[
        {label: 'Traditional DAG context', value: 'traditional'},
        {label: '@dag decorator', value: 'decorator'},
    ]}>
<TabItem value="traditional">

```python {14-15}
from airflow import DAG
from pendulum import datetime
from airflow.operators.empty import EmptyOperator

with DAG(
    dag_id="simple_classic_dag",
    start_date=datetime(2023, 1, 1),
    schedule="@daily",
    catchup=False,
) as dag:  # assigning the context to an object is mandatory for using dag.test()

    t1 = EmptyOperator(task_id="t1")

if __name__ == "__main__":
    dag.test()
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="decorator">

```python {16-17}
from airflow.decorators import dag
from pendulum import datetime
from airflow.operators.empty import EmptyOperator

@dag(
    start_date=datetime(2023, 1, 1),
    schedule="@daily",
    catchup=False,
)
def my_dag():

    t1 = EmptyOperator(task_id="t1")

my_dag()

if __name__ == "__main__":
    my_dag().test()
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

> You can run the `.test()` method on all tasks in an individual DAG by executing `python <path-to-dag-file>` from the command line within your Airflow environment. You would execute this locally if you are running a standalone Airflow instance, or within the Scheduler container if you are running Airflow in Docker.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can run the `.test()` method on all tasks in an individual DAG by executing `python <path-to-dag-file>` from the command line within your Airflow environment. You can also run this command locally if you are running a standalone Airflow instance, or within the scheduler container if you are running Airflow in Docker.
```

There are many ways you can integrate data checks into your DAG:

- [SQL check operators](airflow-sql-data-quality.md): Airflow-native operators that run highly customizeable data quality checks on a wide variety of relational databases.
- [Great Expectations](airflow-great-expectations.md): A data quality testing suite with an [Airflow provider](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations) offering the ability to define data quality checks in JSON to run on relational databases, Spark and Pandas dataframes.
- [Soda Core](https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/soda-data-quality): An framework to check data quality using YAML configuration to define data quality checks to run on relational databases and Spark dataframes.

Learn more about how to approach data quality within Airflow: 

- [Data quality and Airflow guide](data-quality.md)
- [How to Keep Data Quality in Check with Airflow](https://www.astronomer.io/blog/how-to-keep-data-quality-in-check-with-airflow/)
- [Get Improved Data Quality Checks in Airflow with the Updated Great Expectations Operator](https://www.astronomer.io/blog/improved-data-quality-checks-in-airflow-with-great-expectations-operator/)

> Data quality checks work better at scale if you design your DAGs to load or process data incrementally. To learn more about incremental loading, see [DAG Writing Best Practices in Apache Airflow](dag-best-practices.md). Processing smaller, incremental chunks of data in each DAG Run ensures that any data quality issues have a limited effect.

Reviewer 2: Move this before the "Learn more" section"
